Add bdb deprecation FAQ (#7)
389ds/389ds.github.io: docs/389ds/FAQ/bdb-deprecation.md

---
title: "BDB backend deprecation"
---

# BDB Deprecation and using lmdb

Since 389-ds-base 2.1.0, The 389 ldap directory server supports two kind of underlying database:

- Berkeley Database (bdb)

- Lightning Memory-Mapped Database Manager (lmdb)

> Starting from version 3.0.0 New instances are no more created with bdb by default but with libdb.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting from version 3.0.0 New instances are no longer created with bdb by default but with lmdb.
```

> Newly created instances are still created with bdb by default while libdb is flagged as [deprecated since Fedora 33]([Changes/Libdb deprecated - Fedora Project Wiki](https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/Changes/Libdb_deprecated)), this change is about to create lmdb instances by default.

Reviewer 2: A bit of a nitpick, but I think http://www.lmdb.tech/doc/ is usually written in upper-case - `LMDB`. The same for `BDB` - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berkeley_DB .
Or even `BerkeleyDB` - as used in https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/Changes/Libdb_deprecated

{% include toc.md %}

## Why deprecating bdb backend ?

> Because the underlying library implementing the bdb version used by 389-ds-base is no more supported upstream and it is already deprecated in some OS:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the underlying library implementing the bdb version used by 389-ds-base is no longer supported upstream and it is already deprecated in some OS:
```

- [Changes/Libdb deprecated - Fedora Project Wiki](https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/Changes/Libdb_deprecated)

## How to configure a new instance with lmdb or bdb ?

There are several ways:

> 1. Using dscreate --interactive:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Using `dscreate --interactive`:
```

Author: @tbordaz,
Fixed the -- typo 
I think that you have not tested on a recent build because that was  already fixed in the main branch

   Select the proper implementation when the following question is asked:

   ```
   Choose whether mdb or bdb is used.
   ```

> 2. Using dscreate --from-file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Using `dscreate --from-file`
```

   Set the following stanza in the template file:

   ```
   [slapd]

>    db_lib = mdb (or bdb)

Reviewer 3: Independent of this review, need to create a ticket to make this option 'db_lib' present in created template.

Author: No:  It is already handled:
dscreate create-template | grep db_lib 
# db_lib (str)
;db_lib = bdb

(It will move to lmdb when we will do the switch but the ticket exists)

   ```

> 3. Using dscreate with an environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Using `dscreate` with an environment variable.
```

>    Setting NSSLAPD_DB_LIB environment variable to 'bdb' or 'mdb' change the backend implementation chosen by default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Setting `NSSLAPD_DB_LIB` environment variable to `bdb` or `mdb` changes the backend implementation chosen by default
```

> Set  db_lib = mdb (or bdb) in [slapd] section of dscreate template file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set `db_lib = mdb` (or `bdb`) in `[slapd]` section of `dscreate` template file
```

## Can I mix different implementations ?

Mixing implementaions limitations are:

> - The db_lib parameter is stored in the nsslapd-backend-implement attribute of cn=config entry, so it is global to the instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `db_lib` parameter is stored in the `nsslapd-backend-implement` attribute of `cn=config` entry, so it is global to the instance.
```

Reviewer 3: This attribute is rather in database config entry 'cn=config,cn=ldbm database,cn=plugins,cn=config'  not in 'cn=config'

> - backup / restore formats are tied to the db implementation so you cannot use a backup to restore an instance with a different implementation. (ldif export/import and initializing through the replication have not this limitation)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- backup / restore formats are tied to the db implementation so you cannot use a backup to restore an instance with a different implementation. (ldif export/import and initializing through the replication do not have this limitation)
```

Reviewer 3: Should we mention impact on guardian and DB_VERSION ?

Author: About guardian and DB_VERSION: These files are private data and part of the bdb database implementation which is not described in this FAQ. Such information is should better be in technical document (like the design the handover document for the team).

| Question                                                                    | Answer |
| --------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------ |
| Can I mix backends with different implementations in an instance ?          | No     |

> | Can I mix instances with different backends implementations in an host      | Yes    |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Can I mix instances with different backends implementations on a host      | Yes    |
```

| Can I mix replicas with different implementation in a replicated topology ? | Yes    |

## How to migrate between database implementation ?

There are several ways to do that.

### Automatic method

> - dsctl *instanceName* dblib bdb2mdb

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `dsctl *instanceName* dblib bdb2mdb`
```

Reviewer 3: I would prefer 'dbimplementation' or 'dbformat' than 'dblib'

Author: @tbordaz , Several point here:
[1] the FAQ refers to already existing command. We could change the name but IMHO it should be in another ticket as it also impact the code
[2] using long name in command is a bit painful for the users
[3] I do not like any of these proposals.  Maybe rather something like dbmigration (with dbmig as short name)

Reviewer 3: Because the administrator will use this command not frequently (likely only one time), it does not worth the effort of changing an already existing command. I am okay keep 'dblib'.

> - dsctl *instanceName* dblib mdb2bdb

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `dsctl *instanceName* dblib mdb2bdb`
```

> Note: these tools does not cleanup the old data (so can revert by simply changing nsslapd-backend-implement back).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: these tools do not cleanup the old data (so you can revert by simply changing `nsslapd-backend-implement` back).
```

To remove the old database, after verifying that everything is working as expected, the following command should be run:

> - dsctl *instanceName* dblib cleanup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `dsctl *instanceName* dblib cleanup`
```

#### Manual Method - export to ldif

> [A] Export all the backends to ldif

Reviewer 3: Should we say suffixes and sub-suffixes ?
Just to eliminate doubt about special backends (cn=config, cn=schema, cn=monitor,..)

Author: I do not think there is any ambiguity here as there is no way to export special backends.

Reviewer 3: Yes that is correct. forget my question

[B] Determine the lmdb database maximum size. A way to do that could be

> to compute the existing databases size and add a security margin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to compute the existing databases size and add a safety margin:
```

- Add the results of

  ```
    du -hs  /var/lib/dirsrv/slapd-instanceName/db/*/.
  ```

  - Add a 20% Margin

> [C] Change nsslapd-backend-implement:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[C] Change `nsslapd-backend-implement`:
```

```
dsconf instanceName backend config set --db-lib mdb
dsctl instanceName restart
```

> [D] Set mdb-max-size to the value computed in step [B]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[D] Set `mdb-max-size` to the value computed in step [B]
```

Reviewer 3: May confirm the unit of mdb-max-size (bytes, kilo, mega, giga).
Also should say that steps B,C,D are specific to migration BDB to LMDB

Author: No unit (the unit is provided in the value as shown in the example just below)
Right: Step B and D should be skipped when migrating to BDB

```
dsconf instanceName backend config set --mdb-max-size 2G
dsctl instanceName restart
```

> [E] Import the ldif on all backends

Reviewer 3: backends or suffixes

Author: > May confirm the unit of mdb-max-size (bytes, kilo, mega, giga).
The unit is not hard-coded but part of the value as shown in the example

### Manual method - initialize through replication

> Same than the export method with the following changes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Same as the export method with the following changes:
```

skip step [A]

replace step [E] by: initialize all backends through replication from another supplier

## What is the plan for OS that does not anymore provide libdb ?

> We plan to provide a tool that will still be able to read the bdb databases to

Reviewer 3: Should we open the upstream ticket for that tool and add it to the document ?

Author: My feeling is that we should let the FAQ evolve when the tools is ready

export the data in ldif

## What are the impact of using lmdb ?

> Underlying database implementation is controlled by the nsslapd-backend-implement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Underlying database implementation is controlled by the `nsslapd-backend-implement`
```

| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-transaction-batch-max-wait |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-logbuf-size                |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-page-size                  |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-index-page-size            |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-logfile-size               |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-trickle-percentage         |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-spin-count                 |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-verbose                    |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-debug                      |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-locks                      |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-locks-monitoring-enabled   |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-locks-monitoring-threshold |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-locks-monitoring-pause     |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-named-regions              |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-private-mem                |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-private-import-mem         |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-shm-key                    |

> | bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-cache                      |

Reviewer 3: I forgot this one (I thought it was nsslapd-dbcachesize). Not sure to understand what it is for :(

Author: It seems to be already  deprecated (no impact except in a log message ... which is IMHO a bug  )

| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-debug-checkpointing        |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-lockdown                   |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-tx-max                     |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-online-import-encrypt         |
| bdb only                  | nsslapd-db-deadlock-policy            |
| bdb or mdb                | nsslapd-db-home-directory             |
| bdb or mdb                | nsslapd-db-durable-transaction        |
| bdb or mdb                | nsslapd-db-transaction-logging        |
| bdb or mdb                | nsslapd-db-idl-divisor                |
| bdb or mdb                | nsslapd-db-old-idl-maxids             |

> ### Backend monitoring  attribute impact

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Backend monitoring attribute impact
```

> Attrribute in cn=monitor,cn=*backend_name*,cn=ldbm database,cn=plugins,cn=config entries also change depending of the underlying database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attribute in `cn=monitor,cn=*backend_name*,cn=ldbm database,cn=plugins,cn=config` entries also change depending of the underlying database
```

| mdb                       | grantTimeRWtxn                |
| mdb                       | lifeTimeROtxn                 |
| mdb                       | lifeTimeRWtxn                 |
| bdb or mdb                | maxDnCacheCount               |
| bdb or mdb                | maxDnCacheSize                |
| bdb or mdb                | maxEntryCacheCount            |
| bdb or mdb                | maxEntryCacheSize             |
| bdb or mdb                | maxNormalizedDnCacheSize      |
| bdb or mdb                | NormalizedDnCacheEvictions    |
| bdb or mdb                | normalizedDnCacheHitRatio     |
| bdb or mdb                | normalizedDnCacheHits         |
| bdb or mdb                | normalizedDnCacheMisses       |
| bdb or mdb                | NormalizedDnCacheThreadSize   |
| bdb or mdb                | NormalizedDnCacheThreadSlots  |
| bdb or mdb                | normalizedDnCacheTries        |
| bdb or mdb                | readOnly                      |
| mdb                       | waitingROtxn                  |
| mdb                       | waitingRWtxn                  |

### Performances impact

> Several point related to the implementations differences between lmdb and bdb

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Several points related to the implementation differences between lmdb and bdb
```

impacts the performances

> [A] lmdb  does not support DB_RECNUM database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[A] lmdb  does not support `DB_RECNUM` database.
```

This impacts the VLV searches (there is no fast way to get a record by using its position,

>   we have to traverse all the records and count them so even if VLV searches are still working with lmdb, they are very slow.

Reviewer 3: Should we recommend a move to page result searches ?

[B] The locking mechanism is very different. There can only be a single write transaction at a given time.

The fact that the writes needs to be serialized  impacts:

- The import performances because the database write needs to be serialized.

> - The multiple backends write performances

Reviewer 3: Just out of curiosity, does that mean we will have frequent deadlock with parallel updates  (trimming retroCL and direct update) ?

Author: No deadlocks but lock contention. ( thread will wait to be able to start the txn )
For the cl trimming that means that the number of csn that are looked/up or removed in a single txn is limited.
 (So that direct updates may have a chance to get the txn lock)
